[MRG] create assembly and binning tutorial (#4)
mblstamps/stamps2022: assembly_and_binning/tutorial_assembly_and_binning.md

Hands on tutorial: Metagenome Assembly & Binning Workflow
=============

> Today we will execute a *de novo* shotgun metagenome workflow.

Author: ```suggestion
Today we will execute a workflow for metagenome assembly and binning.
```

Below we have a diagram of each step one would generally want to take ([source](https://github.com/metagenome-atlas/atlas)).

![](https://i.imgur.com/AElQa79.png)

There are 17 steps! Each of which requires a different tool. 
That's a lot of tools! 

Instead of orchestrating these 17 tools ourselves, we can put an automated workflow to work for us to do this. 
We chose to use the [ATLAS](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-020-03585-4) workflow because...it works. 
Which is actually a sort of high bar for stringing 17 tools together!

## Instance hygiene

Metagenomics workflows can take up quite a bit of space. 
We want to make sure that we have enough space and compute power on our instances to execute the whole thing. 

We need three things to run a workflow: hard drive space, RAM, and CPUs. 
+ **hard drive space** is physical, persistent storage. 
We write our files to disk for long term storage
+ **RAM** is working memory. 
It temporarily stores all the information that your computer needs to work right that minute. 
Some tools need to load all of your data into RAM in order to work with it.

> Assembly is one of these steps -- to assemble something, you need at minimum the amount of RAM as you have in gigabytes of data.

Author: ```suggestion
Assembly is one of these steps -- to assemble metagenomes, you typically need 20-200 GB of RAM or more; the more data you have, the more RAM you will generally need.
```

Let's check the amount of hard drive space we have. 
From your bash prompt, run:

```
df -h .
```

You should see an output like this:

```
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/sda1        58G   15G   44G  25% /
```

You need at least 10G of space on your instance. 
If you don't have that much, put up a pink sticky and a helper will come around to help remove files. 

Let's also take a look at how much RAM we have available:

```
free -mh
```

and you'll see something like this:
```
               total        used        free      shared  buff/cache   available
Mem:            29Gi       894Mi        27Gi       1.0Mi       1.2Gi        28Gi
Swap:             0B          0B          0B
```

And the amount of CPUs:

```
nproc
```

Which should return:

```
8
```

Ok! We now have an idea of how much compute is available to us. 
In general, it's really hard to know how much of each resource you need for each tool before you run it. 
You may be able to google around for this information, but you will also develop this intuition over time as you run more tools. 
We have enough compute to execute our tutorial because we are working with a subsampled dataset. 

> The last bit of instance hygiene we need to take care of is making sure that we all have the right channels, or package managers, enabled for conda. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last bit of instance hygiene we need to take care of is making sure that we all have the right channels, or package managers, enabled for the [conda package manager](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/). 
```

a breadcrumb for folks looking at this later?

  --version   Show the version and exit.
  -h, --help  Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  download     download reference files (need ~50GB)
  init         prepare configuration file and sample table for atlas run
  init-public  Prepare atlas run from public data from SRA
  run          run atlas main workflow
```

## Retrieving the data

We will be working with two metagenomes from Woods Hole!
The samples come from the Trunk River lagoon in Falmouth (just a short ways up the road!) which has large amounts of biomass and which experiences periodic bright yellow microbial blooms, typically associated with disturbances to the ecosystem ([source](https://environmentalmicrobiome.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40793-019-0348-0?_ga=2.190106795.160855720.1658156183-1639102303.1656704578)).
These metagenomes were sampled from human-made disturbances that caused blooms.
The accession numbers are SRR8859675 and SRR8859678. 
Each sample has about ~1 GB of data, and it would take too long to run atlas on the entire dataset (~4 hours).

For this tutorial, we subsampled the SRR8859675 to the first 1 million paired-end reads, and we will be working with this subsampled data. 

> First, let's download our data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's download our subsampled data.
```

```
mkdir data
wget -O data/SRR8859675_R1.fq.gz https://osf.io/mhr9y/download
wget -O data/SRR8859675_R2.fq.gz https://osf.io/8usdv/download 
```

We can check that the download was successful by listing the files with `ls`:

```
ls -lh data
```

We see that we now have about 160 MB of data.

```
-rw-rw-r-- 1 stamps2022 stamps2022 40M Jul 24 18:22 SRR8859675_R1.fq.gz
-rw-rw-r-- 1 stamps2022 stamps2022 49M Jul 24 18:22 SRR8859675_R2.fq.gz
```

## Configuring atlas

We now need to tell atlas where our data is. 
We do this with the `atlas init` command. 

> We'll also tell atlas that we're working with metagenome data, and that we want atlas to do assembly with megahit.
> (you could definitely use a different assembler! We're using megahit here because it uses the least ram and takes the least amount of time.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll also tell atlas that we're working with metagenome data, and that we want atlas to do assembly with megahit.
You could definitely use a different assembler! We're using megahit here because it uses the least RAM and takes the least amount of time.
```

```
atlas init data/ --assembler megahit --data-type metagenome
```

You should see output that looks like this:

```
[Atlas] INFO: Configuration file written to /home/stamps2022/atlas_workflow/config.yaml
        You may want to edit it using any text editor.
[Atlas] INFO: I inferred that _R1 and _R2 distinguish paired end reads.
[Atlas] INFO: Found 1 samples
```

In running this command, atlas has created a configuration file for itself using the path of our data. 
Let's take a look at this "config" file to see what decisions atlas is making under the hood. 
Note, here we are choosing to use megahit because it uses substantially less memory that (meta)spades.

```
less config.yaml
```

The first thing we see is that atlas would prefer that we have 32 GB of RAM for most tools, and 250 GB of RAM for assembly, and more than 6 threads for assembly. 
Sorry atlas, not gonna happen!!! 
We need to edit this file to set atlas straight about our resources. 
We will use nano to do this.

```

> nano config.yaml

Author: i was going to do it in the terminal, having learners launch it from the jupyter window. Mike taught nano in the unix crash course, so I figured this was ok

```

We need to edit these numbers so they reflect our actual resources. Make sure the top of your file looks like this:

```
########################
# Execution parameters
########################
# threads and memory (GB) for most jobs especially from BBtools, which are memory demanding
threads: 8
mem: 28

# threads and memory for jobs needing high amount of memory. e.g GTDB-tk,checkm or assembly
large_mem: 28
large_threads: 8
assembly_threads: 8
assembly_memory: 28
simplejob_mem: 10
```

To exit, type `ctrl X` type `y`, and press `enter`. This will write the changes we made to our file. 

Let's also look at the samples file and make sure that atlas got it right. 

```
cat samples.tsv
```

> Everything looks good here! Atlas successfully realized that we are working with one sample with paired end reads.

Author: We ran `atlas init data/ --assembler megahit --data-type metagenome`, which produced the config file and the samples.tsv file. but your phrasing works too!

> Everything looks good here! Atlas successfully realized that we are working with one sample with paired end reads.

Reviewer 2: note typo: `runnng`

combine_read_counts              1              1              1
combine_read_length_stats        1              1              1
deduplicate_reads                1              8              8
download_atlas_files             2              1              1
finalize_sample_qc               1              1              1
get_read_stats                   5              4              4
initialize_qc                    1              4              4
qc                               1              1              1
qcreads                          1              1              1
run_decontamination              1              8              8
write_read_counts                1              1              1
total                           21              1              8

This was a dry-run (flag -n). The order of jobs does not reflect the order of execution.
```

Let's run the QC command while we discuss what is happening (it takes about 7 minutes to run):

```
atlas run qc
```

Atlas is automated using a tool called [Snakemake](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). 
We love snakemake :) - it does the thing, and orchestrates all the things for you. 

> If this sounds appealing to you, here is a [tutorial](https://angus.readthedocs.io/en/2019/snakemake_for_automation.html) on how to use snakemake.

Author: ```suggestion
If this sounds appealing to you, here is a [tutorial](https://github.com/ngs-docs/2022-GGG298/blob/main/lab-4-snakemake/index.md) on how to use snakemake.
```

combine_contig_stats                1              1              1
convert_sam_to_bam                  1              4              4
do_not_filter_contigs               1              1              1
error_correction                    1              8              8
finalize_contigs                    1              1              1
get_contigs_from_gene_names         1              1              1
init_pre_assembly_processing        1              1              1
merge_pairs                         1              8              8
pileup                              1              8              8
predict_genes                       1              1              1
rename_contigs                      1              4              4
rename_megahit_output               1              1              1
run_megahit                         1              8              8
total                              20              1              8
```

Lots of things! Let's start the assembly and then we'll talk through these steps (takes ~8 min).

```
atlas run assembly
```

Megahit is the meat and potatoes of this pipeline. 

> It orchestrates the assembly of our reads, generating long(er) contigs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It orchestrates the assembly of our reads, generating long(er) contigs from the short reads.
```

> (We ran it during the initial assembly tutorial, too.)

Reviewer 2: ?? isn't this the first assembly tutorial? did I miss one?

Author: nope, you missed nothing, good catch! That was a relic comment from 2019.
```suggestion
```

After the assembly is finished, the reads are mapped back to the assembly. 
This is good for quality control of our assembly (does our assembly fully capture the information in our reads?), and helps with downstream processes like binning.

The first step of annotation also occurs during the assembly phase. Here, the open reading frames (ORFs) are predicted. 

After these processes finish, we can take a look at the assembly and associated output files

```
ls SRR8859675/
```

In this directory, we see the file `finished_assembly`, as well as new folders for annotation, assembly, and sequence alignment. 

We can check the size of our assembly

```
ls -lh SRR8859675/assembly/
```

And take a look at the assembly itself

```
less SRR8859675/assembly/SRR8859675_final_contigs.fasta
```

> Tons of contigs, most of them babies (#babycontigs).

Reviewer: #babycontigs, heh

> Tons of contigs, most of them babies (#babycontigs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tons of contigs, most of them babies (#babycontigs) - short contigs that aren't much longer than the reads they came from!
```

Author: ```suggestion
Tons of contigs, most of them babies  - short contigs that aren't much longer than the reads they came from!
```

**Challenge 2:** use a combination of `grep` and `wc` to count the number of contigs in our final assembly. 

<details>
  <summary>Challenge Answer</summary>
To find the number of contigs, grep for `>`, and then count the number of occurrences using `wc -l`.
```
grep ">" SRR8859675/assembly/SRR8859675_final_contigs.fasta | wc -l
```
```
1293
```
</details>

**Challenge 3:** explore the other output files in the assembly directory and subfolders. 

> Find the file with more assembly stats and view it with `less`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Find the file with additional assembly stats and view it with `less`.
```

<details>
  <summary>Challenge Answer</summary>
    ```
    less -S SRR8859675/assembly/contig_stats/final_contig_stats.txt
    ```
</details>

### Binning

> Now that we have an assembly, we want to bin it into bins (metagenome assembled genomes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have an assembly, we want to bin the contigs from the assembly into bins (metagenome assembled genomes).
```

The input used to generate one or several output files has changed:
    To inspect which output files have changes, run 'snakemake --list-input-changes'.
    To trigger a re-run, use 'snakemake -R $(snakemake --list-input-changes)'.
Complete log: .snakemake/log/2022-07-22T085856.769525.snakemake.log
[Atlas] CRITICAL: Command 'snakemake --snakefile /home/stamps2022/.conda/envs/atlas/lib/python3.8/site-packages/atlas/workflow/Snakefile --directory /home/stamps2022/atlas_workflow --jobs 8 --rerun-incomplete --configfile '/home/stamps2022/atlas_workflow/config.yaml' --nolock   --use-conda --conda-prefix /home/stamps2022/atlas_workflow/databases/conda_envs    --resources mem=27 mem_mb=28585 java_mem=23   --scheduler greedy  binning   ' returned non-zero exit status 1.
```

We see from the top of this message that snakemake is encountering an error.
Let's trouble shoot this error and figure out what happened.

In the error message, we see `&> SRR8859675/logs/binning/DASTool/checkm.log`. 
This is where the log message for this command is written.
Let's look at this error message and try and figure out what happened.

**Challenge 4**

> Look at the stderror log message that was saved.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Look at the log message that was saved to stderr (the standard error output location on UNIX).
```

Author: omg thank you this phrasing is so much better!

What do you think happened?
What process did you go through to figure out what happened?

```
less SRR8859675/logs/binning/DASTool/checkm.log
```

<details>
  <summary>Challenge Answer</summary>
It looks as though `pplacer` failed. 
We can copy the relevant parts of the error message and google them to see if anyone has encountered these problems before. 
If you google:

```
Uncaught exception: Sys_error("SRS049959/binning/DASTool/checkm/storage/tree/concatenated.pplacer.json: No such file or directory")
Fatal error: exception Sys_error("SRS049959/binning/DASTool/checkm/storage/tree/concatenated.pplacer.json: No such file or directory")
```

You might come upon [this](https://github.com/Ecogenomics/CheckM/issues/37) github issue. 

> The key turns out to be that `Killed` message in the output above, which generally tells you that the computer ran out of memory at this step. This is because we "only" have 16 GB of RAM on these computers, and pplacer requires more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key turns out to be that `Killed` message in the output above, which generally tells you that the computer ran out of memory at this step. This is because we "only" have 29 GB of RAM on the Jetstream computers (and less on binder!), and pplacer requires more.
```

Hands on tutorial: Metagenome Assembly & Binning Workflow
=============

> ###### tags: `stamps2022`

Author: ```suggestion
```

After you have results from the default workflow, you can critically assess whether they make sense in light of your biological problem or whether you need to use different methods to answer your question.
You can also measure attrition of information and determine if you need to do something about it.

There are a lot of steps in a default *de novo* metagenome workflow. 
Below we have a diagram of each step one would generally want to take ([source](https://github.com/metagenome-atlas/atlas)).

![](https://i.imgur.com/AElQa79.png)

There are 17 steps! Each of which requires a different tool. 
That's a lot of tools! 

Instead of orchestrating these 17 tools ourselves, we can put an automated workflow to work for us to do this. 
We chose to use the [ATLAS](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-020-03585-4) workflow because...it works. 
Which is actually a sort of high bar for stringing 17 tools together!

## Instance hygiene

Metagenomics workflows can take up quite a bit of space. 
We want to make sure that we have enough space and compute power on our instances to execute the whole thing. 

> We need three things to run a workflow: hard drive space, ram, and CPUs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need three things to run a workflow: hard drive space, RAM, and CPUs. 
```

+ **CPUs** are the electronic circuitry within a computer that carries out the instructions of a computer program by performing the basic arithmetic, logic, controlling, and input/output (I/O) operations specified by the instructsion (see wikipedia [article here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_processing_unit)).

Log into your jetstream instance using `ssh` or the jupyter lab url.

If you don't have access to a jetstream instance, you can use this Pangeo binder link instead: [![Binder](https://aws-uswest2-binder.pangeo.io/badge_logo.svg)](https://aws-uswest2-binder.pangeo.io/v2/gh/taylorreiter/stamps2022-binder/main)  

When you have a remote computer up and running, open a terminal.
Let's check the amount of hard drive space we have. 
From your bash prompt, run:

```
df -h .
```

You should see an output like this:

```
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/sda1        58G   15G   44G  25% /
```

You need at least 10G of space on your instance. 
If you don't have that much, put up a pink sticky and a helper will come around to help remove files. 

> Let's also take a look at how much ram we have available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's also take a look at how much RAM we have available:
```

```
free -mh
```

and you'll see something like this:
```
               total        used        free      shared  buff/cache   available
Mem:            29Gi       894Mi        27Gi       1.0Mi       1.2Gi        28Gi
Swap:             0B          0B          0B
```

And the amount of CPUs:

```
nproc
```

Which should return:

```
8
```

Ok! We now have an idea of how much compute is available to us. 
In general, it's really hard to know how much of each resource you need for each tool before you run it. 
You may be able to google around for this information, but you will also develop this intuition over time as you run more tools. 
We have enough compute to execute our tutorial because we are working with a subsampled dataset. 

> The last bit of instance hygiene we need to take care of is making sure that we all have the right channels, or package managers, enabled for conda. 

Reviewer: Are you intro'ing conda/mamba before this?

Author: im just going to do it while teaching.

Author: i dont feel a strong pull to have all of the things i want covered actually written down

We'll go over this in detail, but essentially if our computers don't know where to look to install software, or if they look at the wrong location first, things will go awry. 

```
conda activate
```

```
conda config --add channels defaults
conda config --add channels bioconda
conda config --add channels conda-forge
```

## Getting started with ATLAS

We'll organize ourselves as if we're starting a brand new project. 

```
cd ~
mkdir atlas_workflow
cd atlas_workflow/
```

We also need to install atlas to get this metagenome party started. We'll do that with this code, and we'll go over what it all means in our evening session.

```

> conda create -y -n atlas metagenome-atlas=2.9.1

Author: ```suggestion
mamba create -y -n atlas metagenome-atlas=2.9.1
```
